JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
STEVE INSKEEP: And I'm Steve
Inskeep.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
What to do about Russia?
The president-elect's picks to
head the Pentagon
and the CIA face senators'
questions over
future relations with Moscow.
STEVE INSKEEP: Also ahead, Judy
sits down
with one of the president's
closet advisers,
Valerie Jarrett, and asks about
Mr. Obama's
life after the Oval Office.
VALERIE JARRETT, Senior
Presidential Adviser:
He will speak out when he
believes his voice
can move the needle, make a
difference and
be an inspiration to those who
are looking
for positive change in our
country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And how one
sculptor is breaking
down barriers with art that
questions identity
in a globalized, modern world.
YINKA SHONIBARE, Sculptor: A lot
of the figures
are of a mixed race.
They are neither white nor
black.
And I think that also I wanted
to get away
from the binary, the dividing of
people.
STEVE INSKEEP: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tough talk on
Russia today
from the Trump nominees to run
the Pentagon
and the CIA.
At their Senate confirmation
hearings, both
men took a harder line than the
president-elect
has on dealing with the Kremlin.
The defense secretary-designate,
retired Marine
General James Mattis, minced no
words.
GEN.
JAMES MATTIS (RET.), Secretary
of Defense
Nominee: We have a long list of
times that
we have tried to engage
positively with Russia.
We have a relatively short list
of successes
in that regard.
And I think right now, the most
important
thing is that recognize the
reality of what
we deal with Mr. Putin and we
recognize that
he is trying to break the North
Atlantic Alliance.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At a separate
hearing, the
CIA nominee, Kansas Congressman
Mike Pompeo,
accused the Russians of
aggressive action
in meddling in the U.S.
presidential election.
We will take a deeper look at
today's statements
by both of these key Trump
advisers right
after the news summary.
In the day's other news, the
first of 3,500
U.S. troops arrived in
southwestern Poland
in a NATO buildup to deter
Russia.
The Armored Brigade Combat Team
was met with
fanfare from the Polish military
and public.
The U.S. now plans to keep
troops in Poland
on an ongoing basis.
Russia charged that the U.S.
move threatens
its own security.
STEVE INSKEEP: FBI Director
James Comey will
face an investigation of his
investigation
of Hillary Clinton's e-mails.
The Justice Department's
inspector general
says he will examine what the
bureau did and
what it said before the
election.
That includes Comey's disclosure
in late October
that agents were reviewing
e-mails again.
Nothing came of that review, but
Clinton says
it hurt her chances.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The nominee for
U.S. housing
secretary defended his
qualifications for
the job today at his
confirmation hearing.
Dr. Ben Carson, a former
pediatric neurosurgeon,
said after growing up poor in
inner-city Detroit,
he's committed to affordable
housing for the
poor.
But Democrat Elizabeth Warren
pressed Carson
to guarantee that federal
housing funds won't
go to help the Trump family's
real estate
business.
DR.
BEN CARSON, Housing and Urban
Development
Secretary Nominee: It will not
be my intention
to do anything to benefit any --
any American.
SEN.
ELIZABETH WARREN (D),
Massachusetts: I understand
that
DR.
BEN CARSON: It's for all
Americans, everything
that we do.
SEN.
ELIZABETH WARREN: But do I take
that to mean
that you may manage programs
that will significantly
benefit the president-elect?
DR.
BEN CARSON: You can take it to
mean that I
will manage things in a way that
benefits
the American people.
That is going to be the goal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also today, the
president-elect
tapped Rudy Giuliani to advise
his administration
on cyber-security.
The former New York City mayor
is a long Trump
friend who campaigned for him.
He currently heads a
cyber-security consulting
firm.
Giuliani was considered for
several Cabinet
jobs, but ultimately pulled
himself out of
the running for those.
There is also word this evening
that President
Obama will scrap a policy
allowing any Cubans
who get to U.S. soil to stay.
The White House announcement
follows months
of negotiation, and it means
that Cubans trying
to flee the communist island
could be sent
back.
The existing policy had been in
effect since
1995.
STEVE INSKEEP: Baltimore has
committed to
changing the way its police do
business.
The city reached agreement today
with the
U.S. Justice Department.
They were responding to the case
of Freddie
Gray, who died after being taken
into police
custody.
Baltimore cops will have to work
the streets
differently.
They have to change the way they
stop suspects.
And an independent monitor will
check on their
process.
The agreement is one of the
final acts for
Attorney General Loretta Lynch.
LORETTA LYNCH, U.S. Attorney
General: This
consent decree is going to
empower the community
and it will also strengthen the
police force
in their pure crime-fighting
role, as well
as the role that engages the
community in
that.
And with that, we hope that we
will have a
reduction in crime in Baltimore,
but more
importantly an increase in the
participation
of the community in this entire
process.
STEVE INSKEEP: The agreement
comes after the
Justice Department found
Baltimore police
commonly stopped poor or black
residents without
good cause.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Environmental
Protection
Agency accused Fiat Chrysler
today of cheating
on emissions testing.
It involves software that lets
some Ram pickups
and Jeep Grand Cherokees emit
more pollution
than federal law allows.
Just yesterday, Volkswagen
pleaded guilty
to emissions cheating.
STEVE INSKEEP: Americans who
really want Obamacare
repealed started to get what
they want this
morning.
The Republican-led Senate passed
a budget
rule that amounts to a first
step.
Americans who want to know what
replaces Obamacare
still don't know.
Republicans don't agree what to
do with millions
who gained insurance under the
law.
To finish the job, Republicans
need Democrats
and also president-elect Trump,
who's said
he wants replacement nearly
simultaneously
with repeal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The storms that
brought a deluge
to parts of California are
moving on, and
leaving some good news in their
wake.
Federal officials announced
today that 42
percent of the state has now
emerged from
a five-year drought, thanks to
all that rain.
Still, some Northern California
communities
remain paralyzed by flooding.
In towns like Hollister, the
surge took people
by surprise.
RICHARD SANCHEZ, California
Resident: House
is OK, but all around me, my
cars, we're stranded
in, unless I get like carried
out or driven
out.
My yard is just an ocean, but I
don't really
do agriculture or nothing.
So, it's just kind of a -- until
it flows
out, man, I just got a big lake
in my backyard
for now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Forecasters
expect the rainfall
in Northern California to taper
off after
today.
STEVE INSKEEP: Amazon says it
plans to hire
100,000 full-time workers over
the next year-and-a-half.
The company intends to open
pop-up retail
stores, largely in Texas and
California.
Amazon will grow, as traditional
brick-and-mortar
retailers like Macy's are
cutting thousands
of jobs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And on Wall
Street, a drop
in bond yields sent bank stocks
into a slump,
and pushed down the broader
market.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 63 points
to close at 19891.
The Nasdaq fell 16 points, and
the S&P 500
slipped almost five.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
President
Obama's most trusted adviser,
Valerie Jarrett;
economists grade the president's
record on
job growth; one artist's quest
to break down
stereotypes through dynamic
sculptures; and
much more.
STEVE INSKEEP: Now,
President-elect Trump
has said he would like to
improve relations
with Russia.
His choice for defense secretary
views Russia
as America's number one threat.
Let's listen to General James
Mattis at his
hearing today.
GEN.
JAMES MATTIS (RET.), Secretary
of Defense
Nominee: I would consider the
principal threats
to start with Russia.
And it would certainly include
any nations
that are looking to intimidate
nations around
their periphery, regional
nations nearby them,
whether it be with weapons of
mass destruction
or I would call it unusual,
unorthodox means
of intimidating them.
STEVE INSKEEP: Well, let's talk
about this
with Michael McFaul, who served
as ambassador
to Russia for the United States
from 2012
to 2014.
He is now a political science
professor at
Stanford University and senior
fellow at the
Hoover Institution.
We're also joined by Evelyn
Farkas, who served
as deputy assistant secretary of
defense for
Russia, Ukraine and Eurasia from
2012 to 2015.
She's now a senior fellow at the
Atlantic
Council, which is a Washington
security think
tank.
And welcome to you both.
And, Evelyn, let's start with
you.
Is Mattis right, Russia is the
number one
threat?
It's not China, it's not North
Carolina, it's
not ISIS?
EVELYN FARKAS, Former Defense
Department Official:
Nope, it's not the others.
Actually, what is interesting
is, he mentioned
Russia by name.
He didn't mention the others by
name.
The second category he gave, of
course, could
have included Russia.
STEVE INSKEEP: Countries
threatening their
neighbors.
EVELYN FARKAS: Country
threatening using unorthodox
means, like cyber-attacks,
cyber-operations,
strategic communications, fake
news, et cetera.
But it also could have included
and probably
does include North Korea, as
well as China
and other actors, so other
actors that decide
to emulate, to copy Russia.
But Russia is the biggest one,
because they're
really trying to rewrite the
rules of the
international order far more
than China, although
China is pushing the envelope as
well.
STEVE INSKEEP: I want the bring
Ambassador
McFaul into the conversation,
but first let's
hear a contrary view here, what
sounds like
a contrary view.
We know that the president-elect
seems to
want Russia as a friend.
President Obama arguably has not
wanted to
say that Russia is that great of
a threat.
He doesn't seem all that worried
about them.
And let's listen a little bit of
the president
in December.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
The Russians can't change us or
significantly
weaken us.
They are a smaller country.
They are a weaker country.
Their economy doesn't produce
anything that
anybody wants to buy, except oil
and gas and
arms.
They don't innovate.
But they can impact us if we
lose track of
who we are.
STEVE INSKEEP: Ambassador
McFaul, that's your
former boss.
Is Russia really that dangerous?
MICHAEL MCFAUL, Former U.S.
Ambassador to
Russia: Well, I think Russia is
dangerous,
not a superpower.
I know what the president is
trying to say.
I worked for him for five years,
not just
two.
He doesn't want us to overreact.
He doesn't want to go back to
the Cold War
and some superpower competition.
But my own view, and I think
General Mattis
stated something similar today,
is that Russia
is a challenge for the United
States.
It is a threat to some of our
allies.
And what means they have,
they're prepared
to use them.
That's the big difference.
Take cyber-capabilities.
We have way more
cyber-capability than they
do.
We could intervene in their
elections easily.
We choose not to do so because
we're a different
country.
That's what Obama was trying to
say.
The means that Mr. Putin has,
he's not afraid
to use them.
STEVE INSKEEP: I'm remembering
the word asymmetric,
which we all had to learn after
9/11, when
we heard about asymmetric
threats, that al-Qaida
wasn't that large, not
conventionally powerful,
didn't control territory, but
they found new
ways to project power that were
extraordinarily
dangerous.
Is this an asymmetric situation
with Russia,
where they are a relatively weak
country in
many ways, but they have found
new ways to
strike out at their neighbors
and at the United
States?
MICHAEL MCFAUL: I believe so, I
think in a
couple of instances.
Number one, I just mentioned
cyber.
They have kinds of capabilities.
They use those capabilities in
different ways,
political ways, than we're
prepared to do
so.
With respect to their military,
of course
they don't have the military
means at all
compared to the United States of
America.
But they were prepared to use
their military
to annex territory on their
neighbor and then
intervene in Eastern Ukraine.
We're not prepared to do that.
And then, number three, I think
something
that's really understudied and
misunderstood
is their use of information.
They are very bold in the world
of information,
propagating their ideas, using
companies like
R.T. and Sputnik to do that.
And, again, they don't play by
the same rules.
What we call news, fact vs.
fiction, they're
a lot more loose in terms of
those definitions.
And that has a greater effect,
therefore,
because they play by different
rules.
STEVE INSKEEP: Evelyn Farkas,
the Republican
critique here is that Russia is
in a weak
situation, but has been
emboldened by a weak
response from the United States,
that in Ukraine,
that in other places, the United
States has
not stepped forward.
Is there some justice in that
view?
EVELYN FARKAS: I regretfully say
there is
some justice in the view,
because the only
thing that the Kremlin, this
cadre of people
supporting Vladimir Putin, and
Vladimir Putin
himself understand is strength,
is resolve.
And they will not stop until
they are given
the sense that the costs will be
too high
and they will have gone too far.
The other part of this is that
Putin himself
is a bit of a risk taker, so the
invading
Ukraine, in the east in
particular -- Crimea
was risky, but then the east was
risky.
And actually then he didn't pull
it off completely.
And then Syria was very risky.
Both these operations, as Mike
pointed out,
were using their military, but
they actually
didn't use their whole military
either.
They were pretty much economies
of force.
But I think, yes, of course we
need to be
stronger.
We need to deter the Russians.
We need to show resolve, which
is why cooperating
with them on the other hand can
be more difficult.
STEVE INSKEEP: Well, let's talk
explicitly
about Russian President Vladimir
Putin and
president-elect Trump.
President-elect Trump talked
about Putin at
his news conference yesterday.
Let's listen to a little bit of
that.
DONALD TRUMP (R),
President-Elect: If Putin
likes Donald Trump, I consider
that an asset,
not a liability, because we have
a horrible
relationship with Russia.
Russia can help us fight ISIS,
which, by the
way, is, number one, tricky.
STEVE INSKEEP: And I want to add
one other
thing, Ambassador McFaul,
because Donald Trump
sent out a tweet the other day.
I'm sure you noticed it.
He said: "Having a good
relationship with
Russia is a good thing, not a
bad thing.
Only stupid people or fools
would think it
was bad."
MICHAEL MCFAUL: Felt that was
directed at
me.
STEVE INSKEEP: You think it was
directed at
you?
What's wrong with having a good
relationship
with Russia?
MICHAEL MCFAUL: Well, first, two
things.
I want to be clear that when you
mention the
Republican critique of President
Obama, that
is not president-elect Trump's
critique, right?
So you have a real clash within
the Republican
Party, and I think within the
Trump administration,
about how to develop policy
toward Russia.
But here's what I would say to
that tweet:
It should never be the goal of
U.S. foreign
policy towards any country to
have a -- quote,
unquote -- "good relation."
Then what?
What do we get out of that?
We get -- Trump is helping the
approval ratings
amongst Russians.
How does that advance American
national security
interests?
I think you have got to flip it
around.
He has got to define what he
seeks to achieve
with Russia, and then use
diplomacy and sometimes
coercion to achieve those ends.
Right now, aside from this fight
with ISIS,
which I would just underscore,
you know, the
Obama administration has been
trying to fight
ISIS with Russia for several
years now.
There's no disagreement there.
They just have not been useful,
because the
Russians don't want the fight
ISIS in Syria.
They want to leave that to us.
Aside from that, I don't know
what are the
objectives that Mr. Trump seeks
in having
a good relationship with Mr.
Putin.
STEVE INSKEEP: Well, that leads
to one more
point, Evelyn Farkas, because in
the Senate
hearing today, Senator John
McCain said Russia
is not going to be our friend.
In fact, he said Russia wants
and needs to
be our enemy.
EVELYN FARKAS: Right.
STEVE INSKEEP: And they're not
going to cooperate
even on ISIS.
So, what can the United States
achieve, then?
EVELYN FARKAS: I mean, we can
try to get them
to cooperate on ISIS, but, as
Mike pointed
out, we spent months in the
administration
trying to get them to cooperate
on terrorism,
actually starting with the Sochi
Olympics,
where it was on their territory.
You would have thought they
would have wanted
to cooperate.
And I think you pointed to a
very important
point we need to bear in mind,
which is the
Russian domestic situation.
In 2018, Vladimir Putin will be
up for reelection,
and he has shifted his whole
political strategy
inside of Russia from one where
he promised
the Russians pretty much a
chicken in every
pot, a better economic way of
life.
He's now nationalist.
And what he does is, he tells
the Russian
people, OK, you may have a
little less chicken
in your pot, but I'm making
Russia great again.
Look what we're doing all other
the world.
Everyone is paying attention to
us.
And Russia is a great power, on
par with the
United States and others.
And he -- and the
anti-Americanism is rampant
in Russia right now.
He can tone it back.
He's going to have to tone it
back if he wants
a good relationship with Donald
Trump, but
he's going to have to probably
shift back
to that again, because the
Russian people
are not going to be interested
in having a
guy give them a raw economic
deal for another
term.
STEVE INSKEEP: Ambassador
McFaul, is there
just one thing you can name that
the United
States could deal with Russia
on?
MICHAEL MCFAUL: Well, of course
we can deal
with them on counterterrorism.
We have and I think we are right
now.
That's easy.
I think in other economic and
trade issues,
under the right conditions.
And, again, I guess I want to
really emphasize
this point.
Vladimir Putin knows exactly
what he wants
from this relationship.
In return for good relations, he
wants lifting
of sanctions, ratification,
approval of his
wars in Ukraine and Syria, and
his dream of
dreams, an acknowledgment of his
sphere of
influence in Ukraine and the
former Soviet
Union.
That, to me, is a bad deal.
Once he understands that we're
not going to
take that deal, then we can move
on to these
other things, but, first and
foremost, he
wants to test that proposition.
And he's waiting to see what
President Trump
will do when given that deal on
offer.
STEVE INSKEEP: Michael McFaul is
a former
U.S. ambassador to Russia.
Evelyn Farkas is a former
Pentagon official
here in our studios.
Thanks to you both.
EVELYN FARKAS: Thank you very
much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Moving away from
Russia, Mr.
Trump's picks to lead the CIA
and Department
of Defense shed light on where
the new administration
stands on a number of other
fronts.
Margaret Warner has the story.
SEN.
JOHN MCCAIN (R), Arizona: I for
one, could
not be happier.
MARGARET WARNER: Retired General
Mattis was
clearly in friendly territory
before the Senate
Armed Services Committee.
But the conversation turned
deadly serious
on the many non-Russia threats
to the U.S.
Committee Chairman John McCain
on China:
SEN.
JOHN MCCAIN: We see a new
assertiveness in
China to confront U.S. allies
and partners,
make vast territorial claims
with no basis
in international law, carve out
spheres of
influence.
GEN.
JAMES MATTIS (RET.), Secretary
of Defense
Nominee: And I would just say
that what we
have got to do is maintain a
very strong military,
so our diplomats are always
engaging from
a position of strength when we
deal with a
rising power.
MARGARET WARNER: On Syria and
efforts to retake
the Islamic State stronghold
there:
SEN.
JOHN MCCAIN: Do you believe that
we have a
strategy that will allow us to
regain control
of Raqqa?
GEN.
JAMES MATTIS: I believe we do,
sir.
However, I believe that strategy
needs to
be reviewed and perhaps
energized on a more
aggressive timeline.
MARGARET WARNER: And on a
long-contentious
topic, Mattis' opposition
post-retirement
to letting women serve in combat
roles, as
they do today.
SEN.
KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND (D), New
York: Do you plan
to oppose women serving in these
combat roles?
GEN.
JAMES MATTIS: I have no plan to
oppose women
in any aspect of our military.
MARGARET WARNER: The panel's top
Democrat,
Rhode Island's Jack Reed, noted
Mattis has
publicly supported sticking with
the Iran
nuclear deal that
president-elect Donald Trump
has derided.
SEN.
JACK REED (D), Rhode Island: We
have to essentially
stay the course.
Is that still your view?
GEN.
JAMES MATTIS: I think it is an
imperfect arms
control agreement.
It's not a friendship treaty.
But when America gives her word,
we have to
live up to it.
MARGARET WARNER: The Iran deal
also came up
in the Intelligence Committee's
hearing for
Congressman Mike Pompeo as CIA
chief.
Democrat Martin Heinrich of New
Mexico:
SEN.
MARTIN HEINRICH (D), New Mexico:
I know that
the day before you were
nominated to be the
director, you said that you
looked forward
to -- quote -- "rolling back the
Iran deal."
REP.
MIKE POMPEO (R), Kansas: It was
my view that
the JCPOA was a mistake for
American national
security.
And now, if I'm confirmed, I
will continue
to do that in my role as
director of the CIA.
I will endeavor to provide
straight information
to you all about the progress
that the JCPOA
has made.
MARGARET WARNER: California
Democrat Dianne
Feinstein brought up the CIA's
brutal interrogations
of suspected terrorists, now
outlawed by Congress.
SEN.
DIANNE FEINSTEIN (D),
California: If you were
ordered by the president to
restart the CIA's
use of enhanced interrogation
techniques that
fall outside of the Army Field
Manual, would
you comply?
REP.
MIKE POMPEO: Senator, absolutely
not.
Moreover, I can't imagine that I
would be
asked that by the
president-elect.
MARGARET WARNER: The committee
will vote recommending
Pompeo's confirmation to the
full Senate.
On Mattis, the Senate voted
overwhelmingly
for a waiver to allow him to
serve as secretary
of defense less than seven years
after retiring
from the military.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Margaret Warner.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we continue
our look at
the Obama years.
Today, the president had a
surprise parting
gift for Joe Biden.
He presented the vice president
with the highest
award a civilian can receive:
the Presidential
Medal of Freedom.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Behind the scenes, Joe's candid,
honest counsel
has made me a better president
and a better
commander in chief.
From the Situation Room, to our
weekly lunches,
to our huddles after, when
everybody else
has cleared out of the room, he
has been unafraid
to give it to me straight, even
if we disagree,
in fact, especially when we
disagree.
And all of this makes him, I
believe, the
finest vice president we have
ever seen.
And I also think he has been a
lion of American
history.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Another person
who has been
by the president's side for the
entire ride
is his senior adviser, Valerie
Jarrett.
We sat down at the White House
earlier today,
and I began by asking what it
will feel like
to walk away after eight years.
VALERIE JARRETT, Senior
Presidential Adviser:
Oh, my gosh.
Well, there's an enormous amount
of emotion.
First of all, it's been the
privilege of a
lifetime to be able to serve our
country from
the White House, to serve this
president,
who I have now known for 26
years.
And it's hard to leave.
But it's fine.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you're
turning the White
House over to someone who has
said he wants
to undo, dismantle most of what
happened during
the Obama administration.
Just last night, the United
States Senate
took another step toward repeal
of Obamacare,
the Affordable Care Act.
There was a budget vote, which
is going to
lead to other steps, which will
lead to repeal.
Just yesterday, the
president-elect called
Obamacare a complete and total
disaster.
VALERIE JARRETT: I would really
look at the
Affordable Care Act through the
lens of the
many, many people across our
country who I
have had the privilege of
meeting, many of
who wouldn't be here were it not
for the Affordable
Care Act.
And so I think it's very easy to
say repeal
and replace, but we have been
encouraging
the Republicans, since the
president first
started embarking on this
effort, to put in
place a plan for affordable care
to come up
with their best ideas.
And they have had, what, 50, 60
votes to repeal,
and not a single replacement
plan.
So...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, they say
that's what
they're going to do.
They're going to get rid of
what's there now
and replace it with something
much better.
VALERIE JARRETT: Well, what's
the something
much better?
That's my question.
That's the question the
president has been
asking for eight years right
now.
So, if there is a something
better, let's
hear it.
What's the secret?
As he said last week when we had
an event
focusing just on the Affordable
Care Act,
show me.
Show us all the plan.
You have had eight years to come
up with a
replacement.
Where is it?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is there any
other piece of
the Obama legacy, whether it's
immigration,
whether it's the executive
orders that the
president implemented, any other
issue or
step taken that you think stands
a good chance
of surviving under the Trump
administration?
VALERIE JARRETT: Well, you
mentioned immigration.
And, obviously, the president
granted relief
to the young people who entered
our country
through no fault of their own,
who have grown
up as American citizens, and who
he thinks
have a right to stay here.
And we would hope that they
would allow that
to move forward.
I think campaigns are one thing.
And let's just see what happens
after the
president-elect takes office and
the realities
of the plight of so many people
around our
country really begin to sink in.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama
has said he
doesn't view the election result
as a personal
repudiation, but how is it not,
when he campaigned
around the country saying, this
is about what
I have done, this is about my
work?
VALERIE JARRETT: Well, he wasn't
actually
on the ballot.
And we did learn is that his
popularity, which
is at a high, wasn't
transferable.
And, obviously, that's
disappointing to him.
He and the first lady worked
really hard to
help Secretary Clinton win, and
they were
not successful in that event.
But I don't think that that
really reflects
a repudiation.
There is so much about what's
happened over
the last eight years that I
think has the
support of the American people,
that I think
it will be harder than it looks
to reverse
that progress.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president has
said that
he believes race relations in
America are
better than when he took office.
There's clearly some debate
about that.
Some don't agree.
How do you see that?
VALERIE JARRETT: I think what
the president
said is race relations are
better when you
look at the arc of our history,
that we have
constantly been making
improvements.
What we have seen since he was
elected is,
thanks to the video camera, a
lot more evidence
of tensions that still exist.
Those tensions were there before
we had a
video camera.
We just didn't see them on the
news and in
the social media the way we are
today.
But it takes time to change our
culture, and
it's a work in progress.
And simply by electing an
African-American
president doesn't suddenly make
our election
post-racial.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In his farewell
address this
week in Chicago -- you were
there -- the president
talked about threats to American
democracy
now.
Is he referring to Donald Trump?
VALERIE JARRETT: No, I think
what he is saying
is, look, in order for us to
make our country
as strong as it has to be, the
founding fathers
understood that democracy means
we have to
all participate in it.
Those self-evident principles of
life and
liberty, pursuit of happiness,
they're not
self-executing.
They require each of us to get
engaged.
And what he is really concerned
about is to
ensure that the American people
appreciate
their power to influence the
democracy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president is
leaving office
with a high approval rating,
over 50 percent.
He's getting credit from many
quarters.
But there is also criticism out
there, including
from Democrats, that he didn't
do enough to
reach out to members of Congress
to get his
agenda accomplished, that he
should have done
more, gone the extra mile.
Is that a fair criticism?
VALERIE JARRETT: Well, you know,
Judy, I have
been here since day one, January
20 of 2009.
And I have watched how hard the
president
has worked.
I have watched how every single
day, he comes
to the office focused on one
thing, and that's
what's in the best interest of
the American
people.
He has rolled up his sleeves.
He's worked as hard as I have
ever seen a
president work.
And that includes his outreach
the members
of Congress.
So, should we have done more?
Well, of course, you always wish
you could
do more.
The work is never finished.
But I think he's proud of his
record.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You have been at
moments critical
of Republicans for not attending
state dinners,
for not participating in some of
the events
that they were invited to by
this White House,
for not engaging more in the
other direction.
Right now, the Democrats are on
the outs.
Should they engage?
VALERIE JARRETT: Well, I think
they will.
I mean, I think part of what we
have learned
certainly over the course of the
last eight
years is, if the Republicans had
engaged,
even though we're very proud of
the progress
we have made, we would be so
much further.
And what I observed in my
criticism really,
Judy, was much deeper than
whether or not
they attend a state dinner,
although I can't
imagine why anyone wouldn't want
to come and
represent our country when we
are inviting
foreign dignitaries here.
But the real point is, they put
their short-term
political interests ahead of
what was best
for our country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Vice President
Biden said the
other day, when I spoke with
him, he said:
We were not clear enough in this
election
that we understood the pressure
working people,
working Americans were under,
and that we
had concrete solutions to that.
We never got that across to
them.
VALERIE JARRETT: Yes, we had a
hard time getting
that message out.
And there was -- it's troubling,
Judy, because
there was a disconnect between
the policies
that the president has embraced
since he was
first campaigning back in 2007
and '8, and
the feeling that many people
have that those
policies were not meant for
them.
But they certainly were.
The president has always
believed in growing
the middle class, providing room
for everybody.
And so it's certainly what the
president believes.
And I think what the vice
president said and
what the president believes is,
is that the
Democratic Party has to do a
better job of
reaching out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Donald Trump has
tweeted a
few times in December about the
economy.
At one point, he wrote: "The
world was gloomy
before I won.
There was no hope.
Now the market is up nearly 10
percent.
Christmas spending is over $1
trillion."
In another tweet, he took credit
for rising
consumer confidence.
VALERIE JARRETT: I think that,
if you look
at what has happened over the
last eight years,
in large part due to the grit
and determination
of the American people, we have
rebuilt our
economy, and it is strong.
And we're real proud that we're
going to turn
it over in as good a shape as
it's in.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, no particular
reaction
to what he said?
He was wrong?
VALERIE JARRETT: Well, what
incoming president
who is enjoying a good economy
wouldn't want
to figure out how they can take
credit for
it?
I think that's par for the
course.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As new
information is coming
out about Russian interference
in the election,
in retrospect, should President
Obama have
called out the Russians earlier?
He had information earlier that
this was going
on.
VALERIE JARRETT: You know, he --
the one thing
I can say to you about the
president is that
he is thoughtful.
He's deliberate.
He takes in all the information
he has, and
then he makes the best judgment
he can.
And he's very comfortable with
the decision
he made.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Has his thinking
changed about
what he's going to do after
being president,
after being in office, given the
result?
Does he feel more of a
responsibility now
to go out and defend his legacy?
VALERIE JARRETT: I think he will
speak out
when he thinks his voice can
move the needle,
make a difference, and be an
inspiration to
those who are looking for
positive change
in our country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what about
Valerie Jarrett?
I saw you quoted as saying you
were going
to be moving between your
hometown of Chicago,
Washington, where your daughter
is, and some
other places.
What about you?
VALERIE JARRETT: Lots of sleep.
And then, after I have had some
rest, I will
make some decisions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you think you
will continue
to work with President Obama and
Mrs. Obama?
VALERIE JARRETT: Oh, I will help
President
Obama and Mrs. Obama for the
rest of my life
in any way that I can.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Run for public
office?
VALERIE JARRETT: You know what?
You're not first person who has
asked me that
question.
I toyed with it, as you would
probably remember,
when the president was elected
and there was
a vacancy in his seat.
And he appealed to me and said:
You know,
I know what it's like in the
Senate.
And I know what I want to do
here in the White
House.
And I think you will be happier
here.
And, boy, was he right.
So, we will see.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you're not
ruling it out?
VALERIE JARRETT: I'm not ruling
out anything
right now, because I know, after
eight years
here, you are not in a position
to make any
really important, long decisions
that affect
your life.
I know that I need some rest.
I need to gain some perspective.
I still want to continue to work
on issues
that I care a great deal about,
and to be
as helpful as I can.
So, whether that leads me to
elected office,
or whether it leads me to help a
not-for-profit
that's trying to do something
important, we
will see.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Valerie Jarrett,
thank you
so much.
STEVE INSKEEP: We're going to
dig a little
deeper now into the economic
legacy of President
Obama.
He came into office at a
desperate moment,
amid a financial crisis and the
great recession.
He's gotten some of the credit
for a long
and sustained recovery.
But there are just as many
questions about
whether he took the right steps
and helped
the right people.
For many people, wages are only
now starting
to climb.
Economics correspondent Paul
Solman has the
story, part of his weekly series
on Thursdays,
Making Sense.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
And it is good to be back in
Chicago.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
PAUL SOLMAN: President Obama in
2010 at Ford's
Chicago assembly plant.
BARACK OBAMA: The year before I
took office,
this industry lost hundreds of
thousands of
jobs.
Sales plunged 40 percent -- 40
percent.
Two of the big three automakers,
GM and Chrysler,
were on the brink of
liquidation.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
BARACK OBAMA: And I'm convinced
-- I'm convinced
we're going to rebuild not only
the auto industry,
but the economy better and
stronger than before.
And at its heart is going to be
three powerful
words: Made in America.
Made in America.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
PAUL SOLMAN: And, indeed, say
local union
officials, nine years after the
crash of '08:
CHRIS PENA, Union President: We
have more
people working in our facility
than we ever
have now.
And we have also been working
24/7 on three
production shifts.
SCOTT HOULDIESON, UAW Local 551:
There wouldn't
be an auto industry that looks
like what we
have today had it not been for
the bailout.
PAUL SOLMAN: Ever since Obama
then, the U.S.
auto industry has been going
gangbusters,
the stock market too.
ANDY WILLIAMS JR., Foreclosure
Activist: You
will see a lot of houses will be
boarded up.
PAUL SOLMAN: But when it comes
to victims
of the housing collapse, says
foreclosure
activist Andy Williams Jr.:
ANDY WILLIAMS JR.: Look at our
conditions
in our neighborhood.
It's still terrible.
It still needs to be
revitalized.
PAUL SOLMAN: So what is the
economic legacy
of Barack Obama?
Robust recovery, or too little,
too late?
In the shadow of Chicago's Trump
Tower, at
the annual convening of the
economics profession,
we assembled a panel to assess
the record.
Cecilia Rouse served on the
president's Council
of Economic Advisers from 2009
to 2011.
CECILIA ROUSE, Former Council of
Economic
Advisers Member: I think that
what President
Obama did was, he rescued an
economy that
was in freefall.
And I think that he saved us
from a great
depression.
Obviously, we would love for
economic growth
to have been more robust in the
years since.
But I think it has been a
success.
PAUL SOLMAN: Alan Krueger also
served on the
Council.
ALAN KRUEGER, Former Chairman,
White House
Council of Economic Advisers: We
have had
75 straight months of job
growth.
Over 15 million jobs have been
added; 22 million
more people have health
insurance coverage
than they did before.
That's in spite of the fact that
many of the
tools that President Obama
requested to help
strengthen the recovery, like
investing more
in infrastructure or raising the
minimum wage,
Congress refused to act on.
PAUL SOLMAN: But from the left,
Darrick Hamilton,
president of the mostly
African-American National
Economic Association, begged to
differ.
DARRICK HAMILTON, President,
National Economic
Association: I would say it was
a missed opportunity.
He certainly faced a catastrophe
when he came
into office, but nothing
fundamentally changed
the trajectory towards
inequality.
If we characterize an economy as
being in
a catastrophe at unemployment
rates greater
than 8 percent, the black
unemployment rate
is still above 8 percent.
So, frankly, black Americans are
still in
a great depression, or great
recession at
the very least.
PAUL SOLMAN: Glenn Hubbard, who
ran President
George W. Bush's economic
council, differed
from the right.
GLENN HUBBARD, Former Chairman,
White House
Council of Economic Advisers: I
think there
were two very big missed
opportunities.
The first was a failure by the
Obama administration
to focus on economic growth.
But there's a second missed
opportunity that's
really bipartisan, and I think
Republicans
share blame in as well, which is
the failure
to support work.
We need to support work by
low-skilled people.
And that's not a free lunch.
That is a dramatic expansion in
the Earned
Income Tax Credit, particularly
for childless
workers, who would typically be
younger men
and women entering the labor
force.
PAUL SOLMAN: Let's take these
alleged missed
opportunities in turn, starting
with continuing
inequality, especially for
African-Americans.
CECILIA ROUSE: In fact,
President Obama has
put in more policies to try to
pull that back,
through increased improvements
in the EITC,
through the Affordable Care Act.
PAUL SOLMAN: That's the Earned
Income Tax
Credit.
CECILIA ROUSE: The tax credit,
so that we
actually saw more progress on
reducing inequality
than had been made in -- since I
think the
Johnson administration.
ALAN KRUEGER: Last year, we saw
the strongest
median income growth since the
Bureau of Labor
Statistics has been collecting
data.
We saw the biggest drop in
poverty since they
started collecting, since the
1960s.
CECILIA ROUSE: Yes, the
African-American unemployment
rate is unacceptably high.
It came down from a high of 16.8
percent.
It's down to 7.9 percent.
Do we need to do more?
Absolutely.
But there has been progress, and
I think it's
important to recognize that.
PAUL SOLMAN: No?
That's not true?
DARRICK HAMILTON: Well, we
consider the types
of jobs and the fact that it is
still 7.9
percent.
And then if we invoke the
paramount indicator
of economic security, wealth,
then we know
there's virtually no progress
that's been
made under the Barack Obama
administration.
PAUL SOLMAN: So I'm looking at
the numbers
here.
Since 2007, November of 2007,
jobs added by
race or ethnicity, Hispanic,
five million,
almost, black,
two-point-something million,
Asians, same, white down by a
million jobs,
just about.
So, wouldn't you, if you were a
rural white
American, think this
administration simply
didn't do anything for me?
DARRICK HAMILTON: That's a
delusion.
The notion that white Americans
are suffering,
well, they're facing greater
competition than
they have perhaps in the past.
It still doesn't fundamentally
change the
structure of where we are.
PAUL SOLMAN: But hasn't white
America under
the Obama administration been
left behind,
or certainly feel that it's been
left behind?
ALAN KRUEGER: Look, we lost over
eight million
jobs in 2008 and 2009.
That was a very big hole to dig
our way out
of.
The trend would've been much
worse if we'd
not -- had not started on the
recovery.
In fact, the president proposed
in the American
Jobs Act additional
infrastructure spending,
support for state and local
governments, which
Congress only enacted a small
part of.
PAUL SOLMAN: Still, said the
critics from
the left and right:
GLENN HUBBARD: A long-term
infrastructure
program would have made a great
deal of sense,
and frankly still does today.
But that's not what the Obama
administration
proposed.
I think we need to have a more
holistic structural
agenda for lower-income
Americans, rather
than just treating it as a
problem of recession
and recovery.
The advice would be to focus on
skill development
and on support for work.
DARRICK HAMILTON: And Glenn --
Glenn actually
proposed Something.
He said, had the original jobs
bill around
infrastructure had been targeted
to be more
permanent, that that could've
fundamentally
changed the structure of the
economy.
CECILIA ROUSE: I want to just
jump in on the
skills development, because
there was increases
in the Pell Grant to make them
more available
to more students.
There were investments in
student loans.
ALAN KRUEGER: And record high
school graduation.
CECILIA ROUSE: And record high
school graduation
rates last year.
So, the administration was
focused on skills
development.
I think we would have liked to
have done more,
but, again, we were working with
a Congress
that wasn't so cooperative.
PAUL SOLMAN: Isn't that fair?
GLENN HUBBARD: I think the Obama
administration
did make several efforts in
skill development.
I just don't think there was
enough of a structural
focus.
We just had a presidential
election that shook
the country, because I think the
view that
many economic elites had on both
sides of
the aisle wasn't that connected
with the skills
and employment prospects of many
Americans.
So, I think, while the
administration made
some progress, it clearly wasn't
enough.
ALAN KRUEGER: Don't forget, it
wasn't the
president who was on the ballot.
And the Democratic candidate did
receive three
million more votes.
So, I think it's difficult to
interpret the
election as a reflection of the
president's
economic agenda and his economic
results.
PAUL SOLMAN: No?
GLENN HUBBARD: I disagree with
that.
The Republicans control the
Congress and the
White House.
And I don't think history will
be that kind
to the latter part of the
administration's
legacy.
DARRICK HAMILTON: I mean, I
would agree with
Glenn.
I can't believe I keep saying
that.
(LAUGHTER)
DARRICK HAMILTON: I would agree
with Glenn,
in that Obama's economic legacy
was on the
table in this election.
Trump put it on the table, front
and center,
along with a lot of other
things.
And I think Obama actually
campaigned to defend
his economic legacy.
We needed bolder, stronger, more
fundamental,
not tinkering, ideas to really
structurally
change the U.S. economy.
CECILIA ROUSE: Absolutely, the
bolder the
better.
But, you know, the president is
not king,
and he can't just wave a magic
wand and do
all that he wants to do.
PAUL SOLMAN: Like help many of
the people
who lost their homes in the
financial crisis.
ANDY WILLIAMS JR.: I think it
was backwards.
I think the money should have
been given to
the people to revitalize the
community, and
not help the ones who were part
of the problem
and not the solution.
PAUL SOLMAN: Again, both the
left and right
had a similar prescription.
GLENN HUBBARD: A mass
refinancing of home
mortgages.
DARRICK HAMILTON: As opposed to
thinking about
banks.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, I put the final
question
to one of the president's former
chief economic
advisers.
ALAN KRUEGER: Which is, wasn't
it unfair that
the banking system got
rescued...
PAUL SOLMAN: Yes.
ALAN KRUEGER: ... auto sector
got rescued,
and a lot of the rest of the
U.S. economy
was left to fend for its own?
Absolutely.
It was fundamentally unfair.
It was necessary, however,
because the consequences
would've been much worse for the
U.S. economy
if the financial sector was
allowed to implode.
But, certainly, there's much
more to be done.
PAUL SOLMAN: And it will be up
to a new administration
to do it.
Reporting from Chicago, this is
economics
correspondent Paul Solman.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: a profile of
an artist
who has lived on three
continents and explores
history and identity in today's
global culture.
Jeffrey Brown has our story.
JEFFREY BROWN: On a recent
morning in Washington,
D.C., this wind sculpture was
lifted in and
installed outside the
Smithsonian National
Museum of African Art.
It's the latest in a series of
public art
works on display around the
world by the artist
Yinka Shonibare.
YINKA SHONIBARE, Sculptor: It's
a freestanding
sculpture, but it's a very
dynamic sculpture,
and it's very colorful.
And, also, it's deceptive,
because, from a
distance, it feels like it's
actually soft
material.
JEFFREY BROWN: Playful,
deceptive, full of
contradiction, the stuff of
Shonibare's works,
most of all the sculptures for
which he's
best known, colonial-style
figures, some headless,
some with globes for heads, in
brightly colored
African-style costumes.
YINKA SHONIBARE: Actually, my
work is really
breaking down stereotypes,
saying, you know
what?
What you see is not necessarily
what you get.
So, you might actually want to
take time to
find out more about something
before you then
start to make assumptions about
it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Shonibare himself
is a mix
of identities.
Born in London in 1962, he moved
to his family's
homeland in Nigeria at 3 years
old, and then
returned to London to study fine
art.
At 19, he contracted a viral
infection in
his spine that left him
partially paralyzed.
He also began to see his way
forward as an
artist, through an
unintentionally provocative
question that came from a
teacher.
YINKA SHONIBARE: One of my
teachers said,
why aren't you making authentic
African art?
I felt that, actually, what's
authentic African
art, or what's authentic
identity in a global,
modern world?
And so those questions have been
with me since.
And I have explored those
questions in many
ways.
JEFFREY BROWN: For example,
those so-called
African fabrics he uses,
Shonibare actually
found them in the Brixton area
of London,
but they were originally batik
patterns from
Indonesia brought by the Dutch
to West Africa.
YINKA SHONIBARE: So, the fabric
is really
an expression of the kind of
hybrid identity.
I'm suggesting that it's
African, and it's
also Dutch.
It's also Indonesian.
And that's OK.
JEFFREY BROWN: Why are so many
of them headless
or have globes as heads?
YINKA SHONIBARE: First of all, I
wanted to
produce figures that didn't
belong to one
particular race.
JEFFREY BROWN: You wanted to
take race out
of it?
YINKA SHONIBARE: Yes, I wanted
to take race
out of the picture.
A lot of the figures are of a
mixed race.
They are neither white nor
black.
And I think that, also, I wanted
to get away
from the binary, the dividing of
people.
I felt that we're all one
humanity.
So I wanted to find a way to
represent one
humanity, and to also take the
race equation
out of it.
JEFFREY BROWN: But while ideas
run throughout
his work, there's also that
playfulness and
a concern for beauty and color.
YINKA SHONIBARE: I think it's
very important
for the audience to be able to
actually engage
with the work.
I don't want people to run away
from my work,
you know?
I want people to be attracted to
the work.
I want to draw them in.
And I think color is one way of
doing that.
And then you can, if you wish to
say something,
people might be more sympathetic
or be willing
to engage and listen to you.
JEFFREY BROWN: A recent
sculptural installation,
titled the British Library,
6,000 books with
the names of immigrants who've
contributed
to British society, is a more
direct kind
of commentary on contemporary
issues.
YINKA SHONIBARE: I don't
necessarily think
that artists can single-handedly
change the
world.
I think that if you really
wanted to do that,
I think you should go into
politics.
I think that, as an artist, you
have different
concerns.
The work can be funny, it can be
ironic, it
can be engaging, it can be dark,
it can be
entertaining, it can provoke,
but not -- it
should never be an instruction.
JEFFREY BROWN: Can I just ask
you finally
a personal question about your
disability?
It obviously changed your life.
Did it change your art?
YINKA SHONIBARE: It took me a
long time to
try to recover and get back to
my profession.
I have devised ways of working.
I have a studio with a lot of
assistants,
and I design a lot of things,
and I also paint.
But I developed a way of working
that I'm
used to.
JEFFREY BROWN: You don't see an
impact on
the content or the work itself?
YINKA SHONIBARE: I don't see an
impact on
the content or the work itself,
but perhaps
my level of empathy has actually
increased
as a result of what I have
experienced personally.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yinka Shonibare's
latest wind
sculpture is his seventh on
display.
He's now creating a new series
that will begin
in the spring of 2018 at the
entrance of Central
Park in New York City.
From the Smithsonian National
Museum of African
Art in Washington, D.C., I'm
Jeffrey Brown
for the "PBS NewsHour."
STEVE INSKEEP: And finally
tonight, another
installment in our Brief But
Spectacular series,
where we ask interesting people
to describe
their passions.
Tonight, pianist Jeanne Stark.
Her career spans seven decades,
from sold-out
performances at Carnegie Hall to
venues around
Europe.
Stark turns 91 this month and
shares what
keeps her playing.
JEANNE STARK, Classical Pianist:
I am born
in Belgium.
And what do you want to know
about this?
QUESTION: Well, when did music
first enter
your life?
JEANNE STARK: Music entered my
life before
I knew it.
My father, he walked around with
me and sang,
and then I stopped crying, and I
smiled.
He made up his mind, hmm, see,
this is a musician.
Queen Elizabeth in Belgium was
very fond of
music.
She decided that I should have a
special scholarship
because she felt that there was
a lot of potential
there.
I made my debut in the Carnegie
Recital Hall
in the year 1959.
My teacher was Edwina Bear (ph).
She never charged me for
anything.
So, I remember, I said: "Thank
you.
And now I got this big concert
because of
you."
And she said, "You proved me
right."
I have been so lucky, where all
these great
artists, Geoff Leigh, who was a
friend of
Bartok, I got them all.
To learn from people like that,
it takes you
years to understand what they
were saying.
But once you get it, you get
something very
precious.
It's not interpret.
It's understand how music is
made, how it's
put together.
QUESTION: Has your understanding
of certain
pieces evolved over the years?
JEANNE STARK: Oh, yes,
enormously.
I will tell you one example.
I played Mozart's sonatas,
Beethoven's sonatas,
and I was never happy with my
adagios.
I did it with the metronome.
I tried everything.
And I came to the States.
And, by accident, my friend took
me to hear
Ray Charles.
And I thought, now I know an
adagio.
Classical music is not being
really promoted
these days.
When I was young, it was a
golden time.
There were fantastic players,
Rachmaninoff
and Prokofiev.
And, my goodness, the
inspiration was unbelievable.
When I was little, I was in a
theory class
two, three times a week.
You learn to sing.
That's a great thing.
If you learn to sing, you start
to hear.
I am 90 years old.
I don't know why I am here.
I should be dead, because most
people are.
My mind is, as you can see, very
sharp.
And I don't understand, but I
love the day.
I love music.
How I adore music.
I love to hear great music,
well-played as
well.
My name is Jeanne Stark, and
this is my Brief
But Spectacular take on my life
in music.
STEVE INSKEEP: Oh, that's
beautiful.
You can find more videos from
our Brief But
Spectacular series online at
PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I want to be her.
So, on the "NewsHour" online
right now: The
artist Shepard Fairey designed
the iconic
Obama hope poster back in 2008.
In an interview, he discusses
his new campaign
of posters showcasing the beauty
of diversity
and inclusion in America.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
STEVE INSKEEP: Tune in later
tonight on "Charlie
Rose": Secretary of Defense Ash
Carter.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Steve Inskeep.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening with Mark Shields and
David Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.